ACD meeting 102 (#236)
ethereum/pm: All Core Devs Meetings/Meeting 102.md

[Can't hear Adrià]

**Adrià** - I think that we couldn't just adding clients. It's a test net, so no worries.

**Hudson** - Ok. And what we could do is let's have a date that we check in with all the clients on this, score it, and then from there, we can make other assumptions that might be better because it sounds like we don't have a good. Like consensus grasp on when things are going to get done across majority of clients. How does that sound, James? Just like we can pick a date, like in late December to, like, check back in.

102.2.1 | Video | [14:10](https://youtu.be/EPbZ4tU4P5A?t=850)

    James to check in with clients next week and the 28th about implementation progress

**James** - Yeah, I was going to say I can check in next week and I'll check in on clients next week just to see how it's going and then.

**Hudson** - The 28th would be good, too, because people might still be out, might be on the 28th, but some people will be here at least.

**James** - Yeah. So I'll check in next week and then on the twenty eight.

**Hudson** - Ok. Any comments or questions about the topic of Yolo V3 or Berlin or anything that needs to be cleared up?

> **Pooja** - Yeah, just a quick reminder for the authors of the proposals included in that of three out of five, four proposals are still in draft. So we would like to see that in at least in review, if not in last call. And the fifth proposal EIP 2565. That is in last call. And I think the duration has has been over so the author might want to move it to move over now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Pooja** - Yeah, just a quick reminder for the authors of the proposals included in YOLO v3, out of five, four proposals are still in draft. So we would like to see that in at least in Review, if not in Last Call. And the fifth proposal EIP 2565. That is in the last call. And I think the duration has been over so the author might want to move it to Final now.
```

**Hudson** - Yeah. And if you do that, contact me, Mike Zolta or Light Client to get that merged and we can help you with that.

# EIP-1559 Update
Video | [16:41](https://youtu.be/EPbZ4tU4P5A?t=1001)

> **Hudson** - Other comments or anything. OK, next up, we have other Ipsen discussion items, Tim had an update on i.p 15, fifteen fifty nine and kind of a broader picture there, I think.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Hudson** - Other comments or anything. OK, next up, we have other Ipsen discussion items, Tim had an update on EIP-1559 and kind of a broader picture there, I think.
```

> **Tim** - Yeah, I won't try to summarize too much of it here, but we had another 1559 call last last week, I believe, and the big, I guess, take away or new thing was Tim Ruff. Cardin, who's a computer science and game theory professor from Columbia, released a paper analyzing 1559 from an economic perspective and trying to understand is it actually better than what we have today? I just shared the paper in the chat. It's pretty extensive and the 10 takeaways are shared in the third page. If you don't want to skim the 60 page paper, you can just read that. And overall, the paper is pretty positive, about 1559, which is nice. So just in terms of UX, he makes it clear that A having the base fee as part of the network really helps kind of people converge on the optimal bids for their transactions. And that's a good thing. And that the incentives for miners to carry out the protocol as intended are the same under 1559 as under our current mechanism. The one I guess or sorry the two kind of more negative sections of the report was one around miners, where he highlights that today. There's a lot of negative behavior we could see from miners on the network that would theoretically be possible, but that doesn't happen and we don't have a good explanation for that. Aside from maybe the miners are eth holders or they care about their health of the networks that are somewhat altruistic. But he says, you know, that could potentially change under fifty nine. So if if for some reason miners decide to engage in behavior that today they could but don't pick up, that's a potential risk. And then the other this is a much more minor comment about it is the way that the update rule works. In 1559 we increase or lower the base fee by up to twelve and a half percent if we have a full block or empty block. And it's just a linear increase and decrease based on the gas used. And he says that this is maybe not like the optimal way to do this, given that once you if you have a very quick increase, you might then need to have a bunch of empty blocks to lower the base fee enough to reach the price that people are willing to pay. So it's not the end of the world, but it's that slightly inefficient. So we have someone who's looking into possibly just a better formula for that to have a smoother update. And yeah, so I guess I just recommend anybody who kind of cares about 1559 and its impact on the network to at least have a skim the report that was quite good in terms of other progress. We've been working we've been working on the implementation a lot. So there's a there's a draft PR against the geth code base that's that's up. The implementation still don't have EIP 2718. So none of them are kind of ready for, you know, being merged and trying to master. But they're there interop together. We have a small test net. So that's that's a good sign. And we've kind of held off implementing 2017 until it was it was done and clients were brought in. And I guess the last outstanding thing on the client side that we need to figure out is the transaction pool management. So because the baozi changes from block to block, like the naïf sorting of transactions in the transaction pool, if you take a naive approach, you can end up resorting to transaction pool every block, and that's a pretty bad outcome. So we're working to find some better heuristics about how we can efficiently manage transactions. And the Quil team is helping out with that. So I guess, yeah, at a very high level, I suspect in another month or two we should have, like most of these issues, figured out that the implementations ironed out with 2718, then there'll be a bunch of there's a bunch of like auxiliary work like updating the Jason RBC suspects and whatnot. But the, the bulk I think of the 1559 implementations should be done and one. Yeah. Sorry. One last thing we're working on is large datasets. So because one of the concerns was how would clients on Main Net handle fifteen fifty nine one part of that is like the database has a pretty huge stap it becomes harder to process, it might become harder to process blocks that are twice as big. So Abdel from our team has put together I've got a large state test generator which can generate a new network with an arbitrary number of accounts and storage slots in the contract. So we're we're setting up a new desktop now with one hundred million accounts and a contract with one hundred million storage slots, which is more or less what we have a mainnet. And then once we have all the clients kind of running on that network, we'll start with a bunch of 1559 transactions and see if the clients can handle the load for like half an hour an hour, which is the max upper bound of what you'd expect on mainnet. And that's pretty much it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Tim** - Yeah, I won't try to summarize too much of it here, but we had another 1559 call last week, I believe, and the big, I guess, take away or new thing was Tim Roughgarden who's a computer science and game theory professor from Columbia, released a paper analyzing 1559 from an economic perspective and trying to understand is it actually better than what we have today? I just shared the paper in the chat. It's pretty extensive and the 10 takeaways are shared in the third page. If you don't want to skim the 60 page paper, you can just read that. And overall, the paper is pretty positive, about 1559, which is nice. So just in terms of UX, he makes it clear that having the base fee as part of the network really helps kind of people converge on the optimal bids for their transactions. And that's a good thing. And that the incentives for miners to carry out the protocol as intended are the same under 1559 as under our current mechanism. The one I guess or sorry the two kind of more negative sections of the report was one around miners, where he highlights that today. There's a lot of negative behavior we could see from miners on the network that would theoretically be possible, but that doesn't happen and we don't have a good explanation for that. Aside from maybe the miners are eth holders or they care about their health of the networks that are somewhat altruistic. But he says, you know, that could potentially change under fifty nine. So if if for some reason miners decide to engage in behavior that today they could but don't pick up, that's a potential risk. And then the other this is a much more minor comment about it is the way that the update rule works. In 1559 we increase or lower the base fee by up to twelve and a half percent if we have a full block or empty block. And it's just a linear increase and decrease based on the gas used. And he says that this is maybe not like the optimal way to do this, given that once you if you have a very quick increase, you might then need to have a bunch of empty blocks to lower the base fee enough to reach the price that people are willing to pay. So it's not the end of the world, but it's that slightly inefficient. So we have someone who's looking into possibly just a better formula for that to have a smoother update. And yeah, so I guess I just recommend anybody who kind of cares about 1559 and its impact on the network to at least have a skim the report that was quite good in terms of other progress. We've been working we've been working on the implementation a lot. So there's a there's a draft PR against the geth code base that's that's up. The implementation still don't have EIP 2718. So none of them are kind of ready for, you know, being merged and trying to master. But they're there interop together. We have a small test net. So that's that's a good sign. And we've kind of held off implementing 2017 until it was it was done and clients were brought in. And I guess the last outstanding thing on the client side that we need to figure out is the transaction pool management. So because the Besu changes from block to block, like the naïf sorting of transactions in the transaction pool, if you take a naive approach, you can end up resorting to transaction pool every block, and that's a pretty bad outcome. So we're working to find some better heuristics about how we can efficiently manage transactions. And the Quil team is helping out with that. So I guess, yeah, at a very high level, I suspect in another month or two we should have, like most of these issues, figured out that the implementations ironed out with 2718, then there'll be a bunch of there's a bunch of like auxiliary work like updating the Jason RBC suspects and whatnot. But the, the bulk I think of the 1559 implementations should be done and one. Yeah. Sorry. One last thing we're working on is large datasets. So because one of the concerns was how would clients on Main Net handle fifteen fifty nine one part of that is like the database has a pretty huge stap it becomes harder to process, it might become harder to process blocks that are twice as big. So Abdel from our team has put together I've got a large state test generator which can generate a new network with an arbitrary number of accounts and storage slots in the contract. So we're we're setting up a new desktop now with one hundred million accounts and a contract with one hundred million storage slots, which is more or less what we have a mainnet. And then once we have all the clients kind of running on that network, we'll start with a bunch of 1559 transactions and see if the clients can handle the load for like half an hour an hour, which is the max upper bound of what you'd expect on mainnet. And that's pretty much it.
```

**Hudson** - Anybody have comments or questions on this?

**Rai** - Yeah, I just wanted to get people's general opinions on what we're going to do with are we going to introduce a new transaction type like twenty nine thirty that has the fifteen fifty nine gasfields. So it'd be like a different type. Or how are people envisioning those two interacting.

**Tim** - As I understood it, the plan was always, yeah, you create another 2718 transaction. We haven't defined it yet to be to be clear, but I think that's generally what people want to do.

**James** - The quilt team is the team that's that's tackling account abstraction right now and the Cat herders just did a peep an eip with them about abstraction stuff, so that's something else. If you're wanting to look into what they're doing in approach, it's a it's a good overview. And they did they did a deeper dive into like what are the transaction rules and things that make it safer or they're trying to make it as a safer thing. So for those that are interested, would be good to get an update on that.

> **Pooja** - And the video would be released on Monday on the godhood Twitter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Pooja** - And the video would be released on Monday on the Ethereum Cat Herders Twitter.
```

**Hudson** - I just posted a link to the foreman and chat and yeah, it's really cool. Everyone go check it out and congrats on the update. Martin and geth team. Really cool.

**Tim** - this really cool, where is the JSON file.. is it in the code base?

**Martin** - Yes and no, because it lives on the GitHub pages branch. Oh, so there's a call underscored vulnerabilities and there's also vulnerabilities. Just minutes tick, which we use to verify the signature of it.

**Hudson** - Today, I learned it looks like CloudFlare rolls their own geth, is that right when it says CloudFlare dash Geth Martin? Yes. Yeah, cool. OK, anybody else have comments or anything else for the meeting?

> **Pooja** - Yeah, I may have a kind of quick announcement regarding a 1559 oh, we are going to arrange the candidates are going to arrange another peep an EIP session for 1559 that is scheduled on Tuesday. The if people are interested to know about it and have questioned the Zoomlion will be published on the that this got. And now that we are moving ahead with the Berlin and I know there are some proposals which are already ready and that would be seen in future upgrades, cat herders are collecting feedback from project and other infrastructure provided on their part on the network upgrade. I'm sharing the link in the chat. So we already have reached out to miners and people we know and we have contacts for. But if any project, they would like to leave their feedback about the network upgrade the frequency of what could be done to make it better. Here's a link and we would appreciate your answers to that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Pooja** - Yeah, I may have a kind of quick announcement regarding a 1559 oh, we are going to arrange the Cat Herders are going to arrange another peep an EIP session for 1559 that is scheduled on Tuesday. if people are interested to know about it and have questioned the Zoom link will be published on the ACD discord. And now that we are moving ahead with the Berlin and I know there are some proposals which are already ready and that would be seen in future upgrades, cat herders are collecting feedback from project and other infrastructure provided on their part on the network upgrade. I'm sharing the link in the chat. So we already have reached out to miners and people we know and we have contacts for. But if any project, they would like to leave their feedback about the network upgrade the frequency of what could be done to make it better. Here's a link and we would appreciate your answers to that.
```
